You can treat many common childhood illnesses at home. You can also get advice from your GP, pharmacist or health visitor. It can be hard to tell when a baby or toddler is seriously ill, but trust your instincts. Get immediate help if your child is seriously unwell.

This information may help give you an idea about what the problem with your child might be. Don't use it to diagnose your child with a condition. Always leave that to a health professional.

Almost all babies, toddlers and children will get the most common childhood illnesses like chickenpox, colds, sore throats and ear infections.

Childhood illnesses include:

Your health visitor, practice nurse, nurse practitioner, pharmacist or GP can all give you advice on how to treat your child's illness.

Your GP can treat your child and prescribe medicines.

Some health visitors, nurses and pharmacists can also diagnose illness and recommend medicines for your child.

If your child is ill, you can try your local pharmacy first. They'll tell you if your child needs to see a GP.

If your child has signs of serious illness, contact your GP directly or take them straight to the emergency department of your local hospital.

If the surgery is closed, contact GP out of hours services for advice.

Here's a checklist of warning signs that might be serious:

Find out:

Other signs

If your child has any of these signs, get medical help as soon as possible:

If your baby is under six months old, it's hard for a doctor or nurse to assess them over the phone. If you're very worried, take them to your nearest emergency department.

Call 999 for an ambulance if your child:

Trust your instincts. You know what's different or worrying behaviour in your child.

Learn the signs of serious diseases that can affect children:

The information on this page has been adapted from original content from the NHS website.

For further information see terms and conditions.

Or
    find conditions beginning with A to Z…

You will not receive a reply. We will consider your feedback to help improve the site.

Don't include any personal or financial information, for example National Insurance, credit card numbers, or phone numbers.

Comments or queries about angling can be emailed to anglingcorrespondence@daera-ni.gov.uk

If you have a comment or query about benefits, you will need to contact the government department or agency which handles that benefit.  Contacts for common benefits are listed below.

Call 0800 587 0912
Email dcs.incomingpostteamdhc2@nissa.gsi.gov.uk

Call 0800 587 2750 
Email customerservice.unit@communities-ni.gov.uk

Call 0800 587 0912 
Email dcs.incomingpostteamdhc2@nissa.gsi.gov.uk

Call 0800 587 1377

Contact your local Jobs & Benefits office

Call 0800 587 0932

If your query is about another benefit, select ‘Other’ from the drop-down menu above.

Comments or queries about the Blue Badge scheme can be emailed to bluebadges@infrastructure-ni.gov.uk or you can also call 0300 200 7818.

For queries or advice about careers, contact the Careers Service.

For queries or advice about Child Maintenance, contact the Child Maintenance Service.

For queries or advice about claiming compensation due to a road problem, contact DFI Roads claim unit.

If you can’t find the information you’re looking for in the Coronavirus (COVID-19) section, then for queries about:

If your query is about another topic, select ‘Other’ from the drop-down menu above.

For queries about your identity check, email nida@nidirect.gov.uk and for queries about your certificate, email covidcertni@hscni.net.

For queries or advice about criminal record checks, email ani@accessni.gov.uk

Application and payment queries can be emailed to ema_ni@slc.co.uk

For queries or advice about employment rights, contact the Labour Relations Agency.

For queries or advice about birth, death, marriage and civil partnership certificates and research, contact the General Register Office Northern Ireland (GRONI) by email gro_nisra@finance-ni.gov.uk

For queries about your GRONI account, email gro_nisra@finance-ni.gov.uk.

For queries about the High Street Spend Local Scheme,  email HSSS.mail@economy-ni.gov.uk.

For queries about:

If your query is about another topic, select ‘Other’ from the drop-down menu above.

For queries about your identity check, email nida@nidirect.gov.uk.

For queries or advice about passports, contact HM Passport Office.

For queries or advice about Penalty Charge Notices (PCNs), including parking tickets and bus lane PCNs, email dcu@infrastructure-ni.gov.uk

For queries or advice about pensions, contact the Northern Ireland Pension Centre.

If you wish to report a problem with a road or street you can do so online in this section.

If you wish to check on a problem or fault you have already reported, contact DfI Roads.

For queries or advice about historical, social or cultural records relating to Northern Ireland, use the Public Record Office of Northern Ireland (PRONI) enquiry service.

For queries or advice about rates, email LPSCustomerTeam@lpsni.gov.uk

For queries or advice about  60+ and Senior Citizen SmartPasses (which can be used to get concessionary travel on public transport), contact Smartpass - Translink.

If you have a question about a government service or policy, you should contact the relevant government organisation directly.  We don't have access to information about you.

