Turó Park Aesthetic

Discover our aesthetic clinic in Barcelona, Turó Park Aesthetic, for advanced treatments with natural and personalized results

Medicine, Laser, Trichology, and Plastic Surgery

Is your child ill again? No wonder when you consider that the youngest children are regularly affected by childhood illnesses. Although many of them are benign, proper management of these ailments avoids the risk of contagion and slows down complications.

The pediatricians working in our medical clinic in Barcelona listen to all parents. Their goal is to establish an accurate diagnosis and reveal a treatment according to your child's needs.

If you are looking for a specialist to treat your child, do not hesitate to make an appointment now with one of our English-speaking paediatricians.

Fast track your treatment

To book an appointment or speak with one of our friendly team, please get in touch using the options below.

→ Have a look at our price list

When a baby is born, its immune system is immature but it is still protected by the antibodies it inherited in utero. This is called maternal immunity. Later on, the child will have to make its own antibodies and to do this it will have to deal with many viruses.

During childhood, viruses circulate and are easily caught because children often spend a lot of time in the community (nurseries, pre-schools, etc.), they put objects in their mouths and drool or leave small droplets of saliva behind.

It is therefore normal for children to get sick a lot because it is part of the normal process of immunological maturity: the more your child grows, the stronger his immune system becomes.

These disorders are numerous, revealing viral and bacteriological origins.

Chickenpox, also known as varicella, is a highly contagious disease caused by the initial infection with varicella zoster virus (VZV). It can cause an itchy, blister-like rash.

Most cases occur in children before they are ten years of age. Once a person has had the chickenpox infection, it is unlikely he or she will get it again, as it confers lifelong immunity.

Measles is a highly contagious infectious disease caused by measles virus and it is normally passed through direct contact and through the air.

Measles can be dangerous, especially for babies and young children. Measles typically begins with:

Our English-speaking pediatricians adapt sensitively to the cultural preferences of parents and children in order to offer them personalised and humane care.

Prevention is better than cure. This famous saying is also part of the philosophy of our care center. Our pediatricians do more than just treat your child. They do not hesitate to share valuable tips with you on how to stop the onset of childhood illnesses.

They particularly appreciate the emphasis on a series of simple gestures:

Routine immunization programmes protect most of the world's children from a number of infectious diseases that previously caused millions of deaths each year. Please contact us for more info on mandatory vaccines in Spain.

Medical, Aesthetic and Laboratory Clinic
Plaça de Sant Gregori Taumaturg, 5
08021 Barcelona

Dental Clinic
Carrer Francesc Pérez Cabrero, 19
08021 Barcelona

Dental Clinic & Medical Center in Barcelona (Sarria) to take care of your health with the best English-speaking specialists in Barcelona: dentist, doctor, pediatrics, gynecology, cardiology, nutrition, general medicine, infectious deseases, speech therapy, ent specialist, etc.

Name*

Email*

Comment

J'ai lu et j'accepte les conditions générales d'utilisation du site.

Δ

