Globally, infectious diseases, including pneumonia, diarrhoea, malaria and sepsis remain the leading causes of death for children 1 month to 9 years of age. Access to basic lifesaving interventions such as adequate nutrition, vaccinations, and treatment for common childhood diseases can save many young lives.

The CHD unit works with departments and units that are directly responsible for communicable conditions such as dengue, helminthic infections, HIV/AIDS,  malaria, neglected tropical diseases and tuberculosis to make available guidelines and practical tools that include, or have an exclusive focus on, children. Furthermore, CHD works on integration of assessment, classification and treatment of communicable diseases in health service delivery, through the integrated management of childhood illness strategy and its tools that are regularly reviewed and updated in accordance with new guidelines.

Latest disease specific guidelines

Neglected tropical diseases (NTDs) are a diverse set of 21 diseases and disease groups that mainly affect resource-poor populations in tropical and subtropical...

Paediatric drug
optimization (PADO) exercises aim to identify key priority products and their
preferred product characteristics for research and development....

Despite decades of progress in reducing the rates of vertical transmission, 
children continue to acquire HIV. Options for more effective regimens to
...

Antiretroviral
treatment optimization is a key pillar in the AIDS Free agenda to
reach the goal of ensuring 95% of all infants and children
have access...

With the aim of institutionalizing integrated community case management (iCCM) in the context of primary health care (PHC) and comprehensive child health...

Over the last three decades, scientific findings from a range of
disciplines have converged. They prove that in the early years,
we lay down critical...

The major causes of morbidity and mortality
among children living with HIV in low- and
middle-income countries are pneumonia
(including Pneumocystis pneumonia),
tuberculosis...

This policy brief highlights key elements of the
2020 WHO consolidated HIV strategic information
guidelines pertinent to HIV testing and
treatment for...

This policy brief is for country-level programme
managers, technical advisers and procurement
bodies involved in the process of procuring,
introducing...

Data

Newborn mortality

Child mortality (under 5 years)

Older children and young adolescent mortality (5 to 14 years)

Related WHO teams

Related health topics

Dengue and severe dengue

Diarrhoea

HIV

Malaria

Neglected tropical diseases

Pneumonia

Soil-transmitted helminthiases

Tuberculosis

