Many viruses and infections, such as the flu and the common cold, peak during the colder months. Still, late 2022 saw a surge in these illnesses, specifically respiratory issues. Respiratory viruses are commonly associated with young children, from infancy to toddler stages. Therefore, in 2022 most people diagnosed with viruses such as RSV were young children. Although, these are not the only illnesses that commonly surge among the little ones. We take a look at the most common child health issues.

If you need a pediatrician for your child this winter, the professionals at Minis Walk-In Pediatric clinic in Oak Lawn are here to help. Contact us online or call (708) 424-0909 to learn more.

Eczema is fairly common in the first few years of a child’s life. Eczema comes in the form of red, itchy rashes commonly found on the limbs or face. If your child is constantly scratching or complaining of itch, they may have eczema. Most children who suffer from this have a family history of eczema or other related conditions.

Hand, Foot, and Mouth Disease (HFMD) is another common illness among children that should be seen by a professional as soon as possible. Some of the symptoms include:

This can develop into something more serious if a child does not receive professional attention promptly.

While very common, asthma can be easily managed. Symptoms of asthma include:

Asthma causes the airways to become sensitive and inflamed. Because of this, a child must take medication as needed.

Many people suffer from allergies and usually start to experience symptoms early in their youth. Some common symptoms include:

Changes in the weather often induce allergies. Allergies can also lead to asthma, ear infections, or eczema if they are severe.

Respiratory syncytial virus, commonly known as RSV, is a common respiratory virus that causes mild, cold-like symptoms. According to the Centers for Disease Control, one to two out of every 100 children younger than 6 months with RSV may be hospitalized. While symptoms may seem mild, it is still important to closely track your little one’s condition, determining if symptoms are worsening or relieving.

Ear pain or ear infections are common in children of all ages and can have many causes, including:

If your child also has a fever, they are most likely experiencing an infection and should see a pediatrician immediately.

Bacterial sinusitis is often rooted in common colds. If and when nasal discharge accumulates, bacteria become trapped in the sinuses. Antibiotics may be needed if your child’s condition is accompanied by the following:

If your child is experiencing cold-like symptoms lasting ten days without improvement, schedule an appointment with a pediatrician.

Bronchitis is an infection that attacks the larger, more central airways in the lungs. More seen in adults, children are also prone to this illness, especially during flu season. Bronchitis symptoms include:

Opposite to bronchitis, bronchiolitis is inflammation of the small airways in the lungs. This condition is more common in infants and young children during the cold and flu season. When taking your little one to be checked for bronchiolitis, a doctor will look for wheezing when your child breathes.

Whatever kind of symptoms your child is facing, the best thing you can always do for them is to have them seen by a professional.  Contact us online or call (708) 424-0909 today!

