Would you like to switch to the accessible version of this site?

Don't need the accessible version of this site?

Call or Text us today!

5401 College Blvd. Suite 101

Leawood,
        
                KS
        
                66211

(913) 825-3627

(913) 825-3627

posted: May 01, 2023.

As a parent, you know that there are many illnesses that your child may come in contact with on a daily basis. It’s important that you’re able to recognize the common signs of these illnesses so that your child can get the help that they need. Once an illness is identified, your pediatrician can start treatment as soon as possible so that your child feels back to normal in no time at all.

There are many illnesses that your child can come in contact with each day. Unfortunately, children don’t have the strongest immune systems, so it’s likely that your child will deal with sickness often throughout their lives.

A common illness that children deal with is a sore throat. Sore throats could be caused by different illnesses. This could be strep throat or a normal sore throat. If your child is dealing with a sore throat from a virus, it should heal on its own without antibiotics or specific medications. However, strep throat is extremely contagious and may not fully heal without the use of antibiotics. Strep throat needs to be tested for, so if you notice your child’s throat hurts, you should look for other symptoms like a fever, swollen lymph nodes, or phlegm.

Many children deal with ear infections throughout their lives. If your child is too young to speak, you might notice them crying and pulling on their ears or refusing to eat or sleep. Ear infections are often caused by improper drainage of fluid in the ear canal. They will likely need antibiotics and in some cases, need tubes installed into their ears.

Everyone deals with the common cold. A common cold can include congestion, runny nose, and cough. This could last up to 10 days and medication isn’t usually needed. Your child can take medication to help with any pain that they might be experiencing.

Find out how to help your child combat childhood illnesses. Contact your pediatrician for more information today.

Monday:

8:00 am-5:00 pm

Tuesday:

8:00 am-5:00 pm

Wednesday:

8:00 am-5:00 pm

Thursday:

8:00 am-5:00 pm

Friday:

8:00 am-5:00 pm

Saturday:

Closed

Sunday:

Closed

Leawood Pediatrics

