Childhood is often seen as a time when people are more vulnerable to getting sick because children's immune systems are still developing, and they're not yet as strong as adults.

While there are a few childhood illnesses that are particularly common, there are also things that can be done to help prevent your little one from becoming sick. Keep reading to learn more about each condition, as well as prevention tips to keep your children healthy.

Colds and influenza are caused by viruses and are the most common childhood illness. Colds usually last for a week or two, and the flu can last for several weeks. Both illnesses are contagious, so it's important to keep your child away from other children if they are sick.

Ear infections are also caused by viruses and are one of the most common reasons why children see a doctor. Ear infections can cause pain, fever, and problems with hearing. Most ear infections go away on their own, but some may require antibiotics.

Strep throat is a bacterial infection that causes swelling and inflammation of the throat. Strep throat is contagious and can be passed from one person to another through coughing and sneezing. Most cases of strep throat can be treated with antibiotics.

Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) infects the lungs and breathing passages and is the leading cause of pneumonia in young children. It is also a common cause of bronchiolitis, which is an inflammation of the small airways in the lungs. RSV usually goes away on its own, but some children may need to be hospitalized if they have difficulty breathing.

Pneumonia is a serious lung infection that can be caused by bacteria, viruses, or fungi. Pneumonia can cause fever, coughing, and difficulty breathing. Pneumonia can be dangerous, especially for young children, so it's important to see a doctor if your child has any symptoms.

Meningitis is an inflammation of the membranes that surround the brain and spinal cord. Meningitis can be caused by viruses, bacteria, or other organisms. Meningitis is serious and can be deadly, so it's important to seek medical help immediately if your child has any symptoms.

These are just some of the most common childhood illnesses. Regular physicals and doctor's visits are the best way to keep your child healthy.

Whether it’s on the playground or in the classroom, your child is bound to be exposed to a virus at some point. One of the best things you can do is to take your child for regular physicals and doctor's visits. This way, their healthcare provider can keep an eye on their health and make sure they're up-to-date on all their vaccinations.

Pediatric Care in Ridgecrest, CA

Recently, some of our patients received multiple letters from Designed Receivable Solutions Inc. (DRSI) regarding a cyber breach incident, which may ...

After suspending labor and delivery services in March 2024, Ridgecrest Regional Hospital is announcing that this critical component of community ...

California’s health care system is in crisis, with overcrowded emergency rooms, hospital service closures, and insufficient funding for Medi-Cal ...

⚠

Your browser is out of date. To get the full experience of this website,
					 please update to most recent version.

